
            长篇小说《满洲姑娘》内容简介
此长篇小说，第一次以文学的形式，向世人叙述了上个世纪中国东北九一八事变后，日本政府为了长久占有这片土地向东北大量移民的那段历史。
从日本向东北移民，是当时日本政府的基本国策，他们视中国东北为日本的生命线，计划在二十年内分批移民一百万户，五百万人口以上，达到以人口的占有率来实际占有东北的目的。
小说以写实的手法，用几个中日姑娘生活轨迹的交织，多方面地描摹了当时的中国东北社会各方场景：乡村、城市、军队、官场、中国、日本……从而揭示了“满洲国”与日本的真实关系以及中日两个民族不同的民族心理和民族性格带来的各自缺陷和悲剧。
小说的主人公彩珠是个中国农家孤女，幼年时被舅舅卖给了人贩子，是村里的四家乡邻凑钱合力将她从人贩子手里救了下来，收在一家做养女。这四家各有一个年龄相当的男孩，当时四家约定，彩珠大了由她任嫁其中一人。彩珠能干漂亮，男孩们都喜欢她。彩珠知恩图报，她既感激这四家救助了自己的乡亲，但那个有选择却又别无选择的约定，注定了让善良的她必然陷入人情、爱情、恩情无法俱全的痛苦之中。因而，在日本开拓团夺去了村里一半的土地和房屋后，彩珠不愿留下来过较为安定的生活，而是选择了同养父母一家奔赴黑河开拓地共赴苦难……
静子也是一个日本底层的农家姑娘，她的父亲一生的最大愿望是能够拥有一块自己的土地，这辈子心里最深的恐惧是年轻时梦魇一样经历的关东大地震。但是日本土地有限，且高度集中，越来越多的人口让静子父亲这样的农民对土地的渴求只能是梦想。日本政府为了不触及天皇和上层阶级的利益，又想改革农村的困境，便想向海外扩张，九一八给了他们最好的机会，因而大量的动员无土地、少土地的底层农民向中国东北移民。离开日本多火山多地震的不祥之地，且能无偿地拥有大片的土地，正契合了静子父亲多年的梦想，因此，他带领家人来到了以为是幸福彼岸中国东北。
静子为了补贴家用十三四岁就去工厂做童工，因为移民去中国，政府免去了她家所有的债务，并帮她解除了雇佣合同。所以，尽管静子很眷恋家乡，但离开了工厂和家人在一起，而且又能和儿时的朋友美奈子一同去满洲，静子也是很高兴的。来到开拓地后，静子家的生活果然比在国内好多了，妈妈的脸上有了笑容，也哼起了歌。但时日一久，开拓团与原住民的矛盾不断发生，在好友美奈子与原住民小伙子的情感矛盾中，发现了因为开拓团的到来对原著民的伤害，以及两个民族间的矛盾。
彩珠他们去的开拓地是黑河的荒僻之地，这些内国开拓民没有日本开拓民的优越条件，在无人的山沟里，他们一直都挣扎在天灾、人祸、饥饿、死亡的边缘，因此他们一直盼着日本倒台，盼着回乡的一天。三年后这一天来了，他们便结队赶着马车，徒步一千多里地终于返回了的故乡。
日本开拓团在关东军山崩般的溃败中，也开始全员回国。静子一家随着开拓团撤离，然而没了关东军这座靠山，自行回国的开拓民们很悲惨，这些被战败了的政府抛弃了的人们，大都是老弱病残女人和孩子，饥饿、寒冷、疾病、绝望，导致了他们大量的死亡。静子带着弟弟在善良的中国人的帮助下，终于登上了回日本的轮船。
小说全书50万字，细致地描摹了近百年前东北社会的民风民俗，是一部东北民间生活的生动画卷，小说文字流畅，语言朴素自然，寓情于景，在情景的交织中，让往日的苦难并不沉重地跃然纸上。

关于作者：
鲁晓聪，生于1954年，出身于文学世家，父亲是作家，母亲是诗人。她的父亲是中国东北文学艺术界最早的开创人之一。她是一位文学编辑，30多年的编辑工作，培养出许多小说作者。《满洲姑娘》是鲁晓聪第一部长篇小说，她用了近5年时间，在阅读了大量的历史资料的基础之上，创作出这部宏篇巨制，在她孩童时期，父亲曾被流放，全家人颠沛流离，因此，她在东北乡下曾经生活过好长一段时间。在这部小说中，许多生活场景都可以找到她童年时期生活的影子。

A brief introduction to the novel "Girl from Manchuria"
This novel, for the first time in a literary form, narrates to the world the history of a large number of immigrants to the Northeast by the Japanese government after the September 18th Incident in Northeast China in the last century.
Immigration from Japan to the Northeast was the basic national policy of the Japanese government at the time. They regarded Northeast China as the lifeline of Japan. They planned to immigrate 1 million households in batches within 20 years, with a population of more than 5 million, reaching the actual population occupancy rate. The purpose of occupying the Northeast.
In a realistic way, the novel uses the interweaving of the life trajectories of several Chinese and Japanese girls to depict various scenes in Northeast China at that time: the country, the city, the army, the officialdom, China, and Japan... thus revealing the "Manchukuo" "The true relationship with Japan and the respective defects and tragedies brought about by the different national psychology and character of the two nations of China and Japan.
The protagonist of the novel Caizhu is an orphan from a Chinese farmer. She was sold to a trafficker by her uncle when she was a child. The four neighbors in the village pooled money to rescue her from the trafficker and adopted her as an adopted daughter. Each of the four families had a boy of the same age. At that time, the four families agreed that Caizhu would marry one of them when she got older. Caizhu is capable and beautiful, and the boys love her. Caizhu Zhien Illustrated News, she is grateful to these four families for helping her fellow villagers, but that agreement with choices but no other choice is destined to make her kind-hearted inevitably fall into the pain of incomprehensible human affection, love, and affection. . Therefore, after the Japanese pioneering group took away half of the land and houses in the village, Caizhu did not want to stay and lead a more stable life. Instead, she chose to go to the Heihe pioneering land with her adoptive parents to share the suffering...
Shizuko is also a farm girl from the bottom of Japan. Her father's greatest wish in his life is to own a piece of land of his own. The deepest fear in his heart in this life is the Great Kanto Earthquake that he experienced like a nightmare when he was young. However, Japan's land is limited and highly concentrated, and the growing population makes farmers like Seiko's father a dream for land. In order not to touch the interests of the emperor and the upper class, and to reform the plight of the countryside, the Japanese government wanted to expand overseas. September 18th gave them the best opportunity, so they mobilized a large number of landless and landless farmers to China. Northeast immigration. Leaving the ominous land of Japan with many volcanoes and earthquakes, and being able to own a large area of ​​land for free, fits the dream of Shizuko's father for many years. Therefore, he led his family to the other side of Northeast China, which he thought was the other side of happiness.
Jingzi went to the factory to work as a child laborer at the age of 13 or 14 in order to subsidize her family. Because of the emigration to China, the government forgave all her family’s debts and helped her terminate the employment contract. Therefore, although Shizuko is very nostalgic for her hometown, she is also very happy to leave the factory to be with her family, and to go to Manchuria with her childhood friend Minako. After coming to Pioneer Land, the life of Jingzi's house was indeed much better than in China. There was a smile on his mother's face and she hummed a song. But over time, conflicts between the pioneer group and the indigenous people continued to occur. In the emotional conflict between the friend Minako and the aboriginal boy, it was discovered that the arrival of the pioneer group had hurt the indigenous people and the contradictions between the two ethnic groups.
Caizhu and the others went to the uncultivated land of Heihe. These pioneers of the inner country did not have the superior conditions of the pioneers of Japan. In the uninhabited mountains, they have been struggling with natural disasters, man-made disasters, hunger, and death. Therefore, they I have been looking forward to the fall of Japan and the day when I return home. Three years later, when this day came, they drove a horse-drawn carriage and walked more than a thousand miles and finally returned to their hometown.
After the Kwantung Army's landslide-like defeat, the Japanese Development Corps also began to return to China. The Jingzi family evacuated with the pioneering group, but without the backing of the Kwantung Army, the pioneers who returned home on their own were miserable. Most of the people abandoned by the defeated government were old, weak, sick, disabled women and children, hungry and cold. , Disease, and despair, leading to a large number of deaths. Jingzi and his younger brother finally boarded the ship back to Japan with the help of the kind Chinese.
The whole book of 500,000 words carefully depicts the folk customs and customs of Northeast society nearly a hundred years ago. It is an animated cartoon of Northeast folk life. The text of the novel is fluent, the language is simple and natural, and it embodies emotions in the scene. The suffering is not heavy on the paper.

About the author:
Lu Xiaocong, born in 1954, was born in a literary family. His father is a writer and his mother is a poet. Her father was one of the earliest pioneers in the field of literature and art in Northeast China. She is a literary editor, and over 30 years of editing work has produced many novel authors. "Manchurian Girl" is Lu Xiaocong’s first novel. It took her nearly 5 years to create this huge novel based on reading a lot of historical materials. When she was a child, her father was In exile, the whole family was in exile. Therefore, she had lived in the northeast countryside for a long time. In this novel, many life scenes can be found in the shadow of her childhood life.

